# API Gateway

Is a service for publishing, maintaining, securing and monitoring APIs at scale. It is an entry point to applications and acts as an intermediary between a client and the backend service.

It is highly available, scalable and handles authorisation, throttling, caching, CORS, etc. It is able to handle and process large volumes of API calls.

It can be deployed as private, regional or edge-optimised using Cloudfront and it supports 3 types of APIs:

* REST API: using resources and methods and is feature-rich
* HTTP API: lower latency and lower cost than REST APIs and supports minimal features eg. send request to a Lambda function or public HTTP endpoints
* WebSocket API: stateful API eg. real-time applications eg. chat bot, dashboards, etc.

## Authentication

API Gateway supports a range of authentication methods: 

* Cognito user pools where the client receives a token in return.
* Lambda-based authorisation where the client passes a bearer token to the API Gateway and Lambda validates the request. This can be OAuth or JWT verification.

## Error codes generated by API Gateway

* 4XX client error: invalid request on the client side

    - 400 bad request: generic client-side error
    - 403 access denied
    - 429 throttling: exceeded amount of requests

* 5XX server error: request is valid but there's a backend issue

    - 502 bad gateway: bad output returned by the backend
    - 503 service unavailable
    - 504 timeout

## API Gateway stage

Is a logical reference to a lifecycle state of your API eg. dev, prod, beta, v2, etc. It is a named reference to a deployment of the API and is made available in the URL eg. `<API Gateway URL>/<stage>/<endpoint>`.

## Stage variables

Stage variables let you define key/values pairs of configuration values associated with a stage. They are similar to environment variables. Use cases include: 1) specifying a different backend endpoint for eg. example.com for the prod stage and dev.example.com for the dev stage and 2) passing information using mapping templates which allows reusing the same Lambda function for multiple stages in the API.

## Blue/green deployment

An API mapping is used to specify an API, a stage and optionally a path that maps to a custom domain name. Traffic to that domain will therefore flow through that particular stage.

The blue/green deployment strategy runs 2 identical production environments called "blue" and "green". At any given time, only 1 environment serves live production traffic while the other remains idle.

Having 2 API endpoints one for each environment (blue/green), traffic can be switched from the blue environment to the green one by using API Gateway custom domain API mapping. This ensures that there is no change in the external-facing custom domain URL.

## Canary deployment

To deploy an API with a canary release, you create a canary release deployment by adding canary settings to the stage of a regular deployment. A canary release deployment uses the deployment stage for the production release of the base version of an API and attaches to the stage a canary release for the new versions. In the canary settings `canarySettings`, you specify things like:

* a deployment ID initially identical to the base version deployment
* a precentage of API traffic
* stage variables that can override production release stage variables

## API Gateway Integrations

API Gateway can take in a request and transform it to an integration request which is sent to the target backend service.

**Types of integrations**

* Mock: used for testing, no backend involvement
* HTTP: request/response are configured using mapping templates
* HTTP Proxy: request/response is not modified
* AWS: to expose AWS services
* AWS proxy: uses Lambda and no mapping is requried

**Mapping templates**

Are used for HTTP and AWS integration to modify or rename parameters, body, headers, etc. This is done using the Velocity Template Language (VTL).

## OpenAPI Specification (OAS)

Defines a standard, language-agnostic interface for RESTful APIs which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the capabilities of the service without access to source code, documentation or through network traffic inspection.

OAS was formally known as Swagger. Swagger is OpenAPI v2 and OpenAPI is now v3.

It is an API description format for REST APIs eg. endpoints, input/output parameters, authentication.

AWS API Gateway can export and import to Swagger/OAS.

## Logging

You can use CloudWatch Logs or Amazon Data Firehose to log requests to your APIs.

**CloudWatch Logs**

There are 2 types of API logging in CloudWatch: execution logging and access logging. In execution logging, API Gateway manages the CloudWatch Logs. Logs include all the API Gateway internal information as the request is processed. This is useful for debugging a specific request to trace down the issue.

In access logging, the API developer would want to know who accessed the API and how the caller accessed it. Data here can be accessed inside the `$context` variable which contains information about the caller.

**Data Firehose**

API calls can be logged to Amazon Data Firehose. For access logging, you can only enable CloudWatch or Firehose - you can't enable both. You can enable CloudWatch for execution logging and Firehose for access logging.

## Useful resources

- [Best practices in Amazon API Gateway](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/apigateway/latest/developerguide/security-best-practices.html)
- [FAQs](https://aws.amazon.com/api-gateway/faqs/)
